---
layout: post
title:  "R2DBC 0.9.0.M2 available (Borca-M2)"
date:   2021-08-31 16:00:00 +0200
tags: [release]
author: Mark Paluch
---

R2DBC 0.9.0.M2 available (Borca-M2)

Dear R2DBC Community,

We're excited to announce that the majority of R2DBC implementations has upgraded to [R2DBC 0.9 M2](https://r2dbc.io/2021/07/09/r2dbc-0.9.m2-released). As of today, the following libraries comply with the specification:

* `oracle-r2dbc` `0.3.0`
* `r2dbc-h2` `0.9.0.M1`
* `r2dbc-mariadb` `1.1.0-beta`
* `r2dbc-mssql` `0.9.0.M2`
* `r2dbc-pool` `0.9.0.M2`
* `r2dbc-postgres` `0.9.0.M2`
* `r2dbc-proxy` `0.9.0.M2`

You can consume drivers and the specification artifacts either individually or through a version-managed bill of materials:

If you use Maven, you can add the following lines to your `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependencyManagement>
  <dependencies>
    <dependency>
      <groupId>io.r2dbc</groupId>
      <artifactId>r2dbc-bom</artifactId>
      <version>Borca-M2</version>
      <type>pom</type>
      <scope>import</scope>
    </dependency>
  </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>

<dependencies>
  <dependency>
    <groupId>com.oracle.database.r2dbc</groupId>
    <artifactId>oracle-r2dbc</artifactId>
  </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

This release is a major leap forward as the specification version 0.9 defines fine-grained interaction for parameter specifications, out-parameter consumption (typically used for stored procedures), and consumption of individual result segments using a single operator.

Let's have a detailed look at the most significant changes.


## Consumption of OUT Parameters

The initial draft of R2DBC assumed that stored procedures are out of scope because they were rarely used. While the specification evolved, we learned that stored procedures are still heavily leveraged for workloads that are heavily tied to the database. We decided to provide means to call stored procedures properly by introducing the `Parameters` abstraction and consumption of results of stored procedures by introducing `OutParameters`.

The `Parameters` abstraction was introduced with the previous milestone. `OutParameters` is specified in this milestone. It essentially provides access by name and index to out parameters returned from a stored procedure invocation. To consume out parameters, callers need to:

1. Register `OUT` parameter bindings
2. Consume out parameters through the `map(…)` or `flatMap(…)` operator.


Consider the following stored procedure (using Microsoft SQL Server):

```sql
CREATE PROCEDURE say_hello
    @TheName nvarchar(50),
    @Greeting nvarchar(255) OUTPUT
AS

    SET NOCOUNT ON;  
    SET @Greeting = CONCAT('Hello ', @TheName)
```

This procedure concatenates `Hello ` with the input parameter `@TheName` and returns `@Greeting` as out parameter.

The invocation is straight forward by calling `say_hello` through SQL and two parameters. Note that `@Greeting` is bound as `out` parameter with a specific data type of `VARCHAR`.

```java
connection.createStatement("EXEC say_hello @P0, @Greeting OUTPUT")
    .bind("@P0", "Walter")
    .bind("@Greeting", Parameters.out(R2dbcType.VARCHAR))
    .execute()
    .flatMap(it -> it.map((readable) -> {
        return readable.get(0);
    }));
```

You might be surprised by seeing the `map(…)` operator accepting a `Function<Readable, T>` instead of `BiFunction<Row, RowMetadata, T>`. With the introduction of `OutParameters`, we introduced `Readable` as superinterface for `OutParameters` and `Row` that defines `get(…)` methods for both subtypes. Both `Row` and `OutParameters` follow the same semantics of by-name and by-index access to statement results so we introduced `map(Function<Readable, T>)` for easier consumption of tabular and stored procedure results.

`OutParameters` and `Row` define `getMetadata` methods in case you're interested in out parameters/column metadata.

## Consuming individual segments

Imagine a client that passes-thru SQL without being aware of what kind of result it is going to produce. `Result.map(…)` and `Result.getRowsUpdated()` have been the only two methods to consume results and both are mutually exclusive. Consuming rows doesn't allow for access to update counts and vice versa.

This release removes this limitation by introducing `filter` and `flatMap` methods that conceptually turn `Result` into a `Publisher<Segment>`. `Segment` is a type hierarchy to represent the individual result types that a statement can produce: Update counts, rows, out parameters, messages, and any vendor-specific types.

Consumers that are interested in all types of segments can leverage the `flatMap(Function<Segment, Publisher<T>>)` operator to process a single segment into zero, one, or many resulting items, depending on how the result should be processed.

Consider the following example. The function only processes row segments by copying values into a `Map`:

```java
result.flatMap(segment -> {

    if (!(data instanceof Result.RowSegment)) {
        return Mono.empty();
    }

    Result.RowSegment data = (Result.RowSegment) segment;

    Map<String, Object> rowData = new HashMap<>();
    for (ColumnMetadata column : data.row().getMetadata().getColumnMetadatas()) {
        rowData.put(column.getName(), data.row().get(column.getName()));
    }

    return Mono.just(rowData);
})
```

To avoid repetative patterns of `instanceof` checks, results can be filtered regarding their segments that a `Result` should hold. `filter(Predicate<Segment> filter)` returns a filtered `Result`. That is useful when interested only in particular segments. The code above could be rewritten to:

```java
result.filter(Result.RowSegment.class::isInstance).flatMap(segment -> {

    Result.RowSegment data = (Result.RowSegment) segment;

    Map<String, Object> rowData = new HashMap<>();
    for (ColumnMetadata column : data.row().getMetadata().getColumnMetadatas()) {
        rowData.put(column.getName(), data.row().get(column.getName()));
    }

    return Mono.just(rowData);
});
```

A segment type that was introduced with this release is the message segment. Messages are of informational, warning or error nature and can lead to error signals by translating these into `R2dbcException`.

The segment API now gives access to SQL warnings that weren't accessible in the previous R2DBC release.

```java
result.filter(Result.Message.class::isInstance).flatMap(data -> {

    Result.Message message = (Result.Message) data;
    assertThat(message.errorCode()).isZero();
    assertThat(message.sqlState()).isEqualTo("S0000");
    assertThat(message.message()).isEqualTo("error message desc");
    assertThat(message.exception()).isInstanceOf(R2dbcNonTransientResourceException.class);

    return Mono.just(data);
}))
```

The `filter(…)` operator can also be used to filter out message segments so you can create a `Result` that doesn't contain any segments leading to an error:

```java
result.filter(it -> !(it instanceof Result.Message)).map(…)
```

Subsequent operators (`map`, `getRowsUpdated`, `flatMap`) process the result in its filtered form. To illustrate this a bit more, the following code would filter out all update counts and consuming the update count through `getRowsUpdated` would never return the actual result:

```java
result.filter(it -> !(it instanceof Result.UpdateCount)).getRowsUpdated()
```

The segments API is an advanced mechanism to consume results and segments are only valid within the `map`/`flatMap` operator function. Segments must never leave these functions as they are invalidated once the function call terminates.

You can find the full list of API changes in the [R2DBC 0.9.0.M2 announcement blog post](https://r2dbc.io/2021/07/09/r2dbc-0.9.m2-released).

This release ships a first batch of drivers that implement the specification changes. Watch out for future evolution or reach out to the maintainers of the driver you're interested in if the driver doesn't fully support the specification yet.